on april 5th
1975 a conference entitled
the central intelligence agency and
world peace
was held in new haven connecticut on the
campus of yale university
from one of the afternoon workshops of
the conference
professor frank donner author of the
un-americans
provides an overview of domestic
surveillance carried out by the cia
fbi and other government agencies
he also details the extent and legality
of spying on american citizens
frank donner i want to talk to you about
domestic
political intelligence
which is not merely
a mode of operation but a mode of
government
a clandestine system of social and
political controls
that outruns the forms of law
domestic political intelligence in the
sense that i
use it consists of three parts
the first is operations the second
is the product or the files
and the third is a body of assumptions
the philosophy of intelligence the
political theory of intelligence if you
will
now intelligence uh is in a democratic
society
an anomaly that is
uh it is a form of control
which is usually not recognized
and justified on other reasons for other
reasons
its origin it has it has two sources
first the military every domestic
political intelligence system
is rooted in military controls for
example in britain
uh mi5 military intelligence
is a is a term it's a is a domestic
intelligence operation
but still bears the imprint of its
military origin
the second origin of domestic political
intelligence
is diplomacy or statecraft that is the
relations of nations to other nations
now i should say that i'm talking about
a system
which is unrelated to law enforcement
but for which law enforcement frequently
serves as a cover
and i should begin perhaps
by observing that like every stigmatized
calling intelligence has developed
a great cosmetic rhetoric
a way of disguising what it really is
and what it really does
you me you may recall for example that
hunt
when he testified did not speak of
casing
dr fielding's office but of making a
judgment visit
uh and so throughout the vocabulary of
intelligence
we find a kind of
pseudo-professionalizing
a rhetoric which as i say is intended to
cosmetize what is really involved
and words like one of the most important
of this uh uh intelligence
lingo is mission
a mission is a which on its face
bears the imprint of its military
origins
is a way that every surveillance agency
has
of ideal ideologizing its function
that is it gives itself some
superordinate
kind of role uh which which as it
which is an interpretation which happens
to suit its convenience
and of course there are a great many
other uh terms for example
uh uh one speaks uh not of an informer
but of a source
even the word intelligence has a kind of
awe-inspiring resonance
which is quite remote from the reality
of what it is
the other point that i ought to make
about intelligence is
is that it is typically secret and in
this country in any way
at any rate an executive function
that it is a means of promoting uh
the power of the executive and defending
the executive
against attacks from critics
now let me now turn to the assumptions
the political theory of intelligence
it hardly needs to be said anybody who
reads the paper will recognize that
intelligence is a resource
of conservative politics uh
there are no progressive liberal
intelligence people that i know of that
are still in the agencies
uh second uh the basic
uh commitment the mission if you will
of american intelligence is the long
twilight
struggle for supremacy the struggle
against subversion
against revolution and so on uh and that
is a
deeply held uh uh commitment
the notion that there's going to be an
apocalyptic
showdown with the bad guys
and we have to know who they are
and we have to keep them on file and
watch them
and this notion of some ultimate
showdown with the forces of revolution
is very deeply rooted in us not only in
our politics but in our culture
and it and its origins really go back to
the
american response to the russian
revolution in the 20s
the idea that there's going to be a
bolshevik style revolution in the
country
where blood will flow and so on has has
deeply gripped the american imagination
of course intelligence has a powerful to
use a sociological term
negative bias uh that is
it it's it sees uh
the targets of its subversive targets
everywhere and this is not only an
occupational characteristic of
intelligence people
but a political necessity in order to
justify its existence
especially in a democratic society
it must naturally exaggerate
the power the intentions and the number
of the enemy
this is the source of course of the
constant
funding that intelligence receives over
the years
next as a part of this body of
assumptions i'm talking about
is the notion of foreign instigation
is that this that manifestations of
social unrest
or protest are instigated
by some a foreign agent uh
as a product of some plot
hatched abroad some serpent in our
paradise
uh and uh this again is a deeply rooted
kind of assumption of the intelligence
world
and you may recall that one of uh
president nixon's early assignments
uh was to ask the cia
whether domestic intelligence movements
had
some foreign instigation and he was
enormously disappointed to learn
that it wasn't so especially after
one of his transcripts revealed that mr
haldeman said wouldn't it be a good idea
to to label all this peace stuff as part
of a foreign plot
so now i come to
another aspect of intelligence which is
it's it that it individuates social
protest and dissent
the great uh the great uh scare
figure in the intelligence world is the
agitator
uh this sinister fellow that comes in
to an otherwise contented scene and
disrupts
and this notion that protest has no
social dimension what is simply the
product of subversive agitation
is a very deeply held assumption of
intelligence
and finally there is an intelligence
assumption
that no matter how innocent an act may
seem
or how justified a form of protest
may be it may ultimately turn out to be
part of a sinister jigsaw
puzzle of which you only have a
seemingly innocuous part
and so everything is grist for the
intelligence mill
now now let me now having all to briefly
sketch the assumptions of intelligence
let's talk with equal brevity about
intelligence institutions there are
institutions that exist on the federal
level
and on the local level there are some 20
federal institutions that are
part of what again one of those charming
words that's always beguiled me the
intelligence community
uh that is the the institutions
that are bound together by common
assumptions
that engage in
um some form of liaison
liaison intelligence i like the british
verb the british say to liaise
uh when they talk about their
intelligence system
that is uh uh the intelligence agencies
like to develop a point where they can
exchange
information some of them have more
operational capability than others
and some of them have better files than
others and they trade off
whenever they can whenever they can in
order to achieve their mission
uh then there's of course a cia
the irs the civil service commission
congressional committees these are all
basically have some intelligence
functions
some more than others
and and of course we have we have on the
local level
uh local anti-subversive units which
have no real law enforcement
responsibilities either
and state units that are all part of
this still encode
intelligence community now i just
reminded myself that i've forgotten to
mention one other point about american
intelligence
which is that it likes to picture itself
as defensive
foreign intelligence agents are very
amused at the ease
with which we call intelligence
operations
counter intelligence that is that we all
we
are doing is trying to defend our
institutions
from the activities and the machinations
of foreign spies
and so our intelligence is counter
intelligence
whereas theirs is you know what now
and of course you see for example uh
very uh
uh melodramatized if you will uh
uh uses of this like the charge that as
the cia these cia disclosures
become public the kgb
is just convulsed with glee over the
fact that they now are
are now have such uh uh an easier time
of it
because their traditional enemies are in
disarray and so on
and this notion you see of of
uh a threatened innocence a compromised
innocence
by the spies of the other side is again
something that's deeply remote rooted in
american intelligence practice
now uh there's
another characteristic of american
intelligence institutions which i find
fascinating and that is almost
every one of them is characterized by an
abuse of power
that is an attempt to convert
some delegation of authority
uh which has some substantive
importance uh into an
independent exercise of intelligence
power
of course the probably the most uh clear
example of that
are congressional committees which for
years used their powers for intelligence
purposes
but claimed that they were for
legislative purposes
uh the recent uh flurry of grand juries
the cia the irs
have all converted powers that were
granted for other reasons
into an intelligence function and of
course
uh the best example of that really
uh is the fbi uh
and let me just stop a moment because i
think
that if there's anything that i say
and i'm not vain enough to think any of
it is very important except one thing
and i i really there's one thing that i
would like you to go away
with it's this
that for over three decades the fbi
has been engaging in political
surveillance unrelated to law
enforcement
without any legitimate authority
now uh uh i used to be a voice crying in
the wilderness about this
but apparently it's now reached the ears
of congress and other people
the fbi traditionally justified its
powers
to engage in people-watching that is
surveillance unrelated to law
enforcement
on the basis of a memorandum
that was sent on september 6 1939
to the attorney general by president
roosevelt
in which he said in effect um
look we're entering a war uh
we have to worry about sabotage we have
to worry about
spies and so
and and so i would like you to set up an
intelligence capability
for this purpose now long after the war
passed uh through the mccarthy era
through the cold war
this letter of roosevelt's received this
artificial resuscitation repeatedly
and was torn from its context
and used as an authority for
people watching unrelated to law
enforcement
a memorandum and it says i have your
memorandum of april
august 6 1973 which recommends the
issuance of an executive order
concerning the authority of the fbi
to conduct domestic intelligence
operations
in other words on august 6 1973
director kelly writes a letter to the
attorney general
saying please get me an executive order
authorizing me to engage in the kind of
thing we've been doing for over 30 years
and he says your memorandum indicates
i'm reading now from this
uh document your memorandum indicates
that the proposed order
is designed to accomplish several
objectives
one to establish that the fbi has been
instructed to engage in domestic
intelligence operations
two to supplement the statutory
authority of the fbi
by death by delegating any
constitutional power the president may
have in this area
and three to direct the attorney general
to establish
guidelines for domestic intelligence
i know i'm getting boring but this is 30
years late too late
now
why did we tolerate this kind of
usurpation of power for 30 years
and how after reviewing that experience
can we smugly sit back and say
it can't happen here what
what uh repressive forces were at work
in the society
uh that could not prevent
the cry that the emperor has no clothes
from being heard
i'm i don't know the answer to that but
i just leave
leave you to ponder it
now when i don't want you to think that
just because
kelly no longer admits or no longer
claims
that he has authority to engage in
political
intelligence that he stopped oh no
now he does exactly the same thing as he
did before
but now he's trotted out
a law enforcement justification
you know my i would like uh
my epitaph to read illegality breeds
deception
that deception is the price we pay for
survival
in a democracy kelly could not stop
doing what he was doing before because
it was illegal
he now engages he now
puts forth a counterfeit
justification the counterfeit
justification
is all these people that he's been
watching
are revolutionaries they're embryonic
saboteurs and that he is merely
enforcing
the laws against sabotage against
treason
against sedition now it's quite true
that
the laws against sedition haven't been
uh
enforced in almost a generation now but
who knows
you can't be too careful when the life
of the nation is at stake
and so again a deception
the deception a that you're engaged in
law enforcement
a b that the people you're surveilling
are
really threatening to violate some law
even though their right to do what
they're doing is protected by the
constitution
in a deception that our security is so
fragile that these people have to be
wiretapped
and infiltrated otherwise
we may be faced with an unacceptable
threat to our national
safety now what a pile of deception that
is uh uh what a what a what a
a gross misuse of power
to pretend that kind of thing and yes
that's what it is now
another price we pay for living in a
democracy it's getting to be very
expensive if you'll notice
uh is that
you have to create in the popular mind
a fear that our national security
is really threatened you know
we americans are programmed for fear
uh we approach we for example we are
terrified that if we don't use the right
antifreeze our car will go over
or if you don't wear the right bra use
the right toothpaste or whatever
the whole society is built we try to
convert our anxieties into consumption
we also try to convert them into
repression
uh and so every intelligence agency must
at some point
become a sort of ministry of propaganda
it has to revive and freshen up
the fears which tolerate this sort of
thing or which permitted to go on
and uh and so for example
uh the of course the classic example of
this was hoover
director of the fbi jay edgar hoover
who had a stock
technique which was a dual
strategy of alarm and containment
he would always say that the reds are
getting stronger and stronger
and they're right almost almost but but
he couldn't say that they had
actually attained their goal largely
because it would defy
to obviously defy the reality and also
because
it would show that the fbi wasn't doing
a very good job
and so he says he would say oh it's it's
worse than ever uh they're now sure
they've lost their
numbers their membership but they're now
down to their
hard core and so were these metaphors of
the tip of the iceberg the hardcore the
fellow travelers
uh uh the um trojan horse
uh all of these metaphors of conspiracy
craft and
cunning uh he he he continually kept the
menace alive
uh and always got the kinds of
appropriations that he wanted
uh and of course this is as i said this
is the price in a totalitarian
totalitarian state you just do it but
here you have to lie
about why you have to do it because
there are norms that you have to comply
with
now um and so
we we have this kind of we've been
victims of this kind of
manipulation in propaganda for a very
long time
now you mustn't think that hoover didn't
know better
because part of every intelligence
system is some form
of a professional evaluation
and hoover had reports that the fb
that the communist party was was not
gaining in power
he had reports that the socialist
workers party was not
gaining in power but he suppressed them
because it didn't suit his purposes and
threatened
his mission marvelous word that mission
now we come to operations
operations of any intelligence agency
are systemic that is they're
an interrelated unified body
of tactics for acquiring
information and for other purposes as
well
and uh we we have i think concentrated
almost too much
on the operations and i think we're sort
of turned on
by uh uh uh things
uh these operational uh kinds of uh
modes like wiretapping informers and so
on
uh the important thing
to recognize about american
intelligence operations is that they are
not purely passive
the fiction you see this is another one
of those deceptions
the notion that all these people do
is go to meetings and take down reports
year after year of the same thing joe
blow and alice and
mildred all came to the meeting and it
was voted so and so and you fill
187 linear feet of file space
for one year with this kind of garbage
uh no every intelligence operation
ultimately becomes aggressive
uh ultimately the operation
is not a means to the end
of enlightening a decision maker but an
end in itself
a means of
harassing uh well
of creating a fear in the subjects
and of course we see that in the media
papers and in
many other places and so
this is the important thing uh that that
intelligence
you see if if this were a rational
system here you have the fbi
it's collecting all this intelligence
now everybody knows that
that a secret police system is not
supposed to make
policy decisions on the basis of the
intelligence it collects
it's supposed to channel it to some
decision-making body
but the fbi never channeled anything it
used this
as a kind of uh it part of a guerrilla
warfare if you will
against its subjects a kind of ongoing
uh political warfare and
uh and so i can't of course
engage in counter-intelligence programs
we know about the six
that have been made public but they've
been doing this for a long long time
without formal counterintelligence
programs
incidentally there's another beautiful
use of the word counter intelligence
that is we were only doing this we were
only harassing
uh the black activists and the peace
forces
and the communist party and the
socialist workers party
because we were trying to frustrate
their attempts to spy on us
simple so it's called counter
intelligence
but what it really is is an
institutionalized
form of the kind of aggression
that is implicit in the domestic
political intelligence system
now i want to speak very briefly about
files
uh uh you know files have a fascinating
mystique
uh when uh uh attorney general stone
in 1924 went to j edgar hoover
and said i want you to cut out all this
political intelligence stuff
and only investigate when there's
probable
cause that a crime has been committed
that's the standard
he also said to hoover unfortunately
we can't eliminate our files
that would require an act of congress
and so we have forests of files
the living in the dead the the children
the fathers the sons the grandchildren
and of course with technology these
things are
uh the technology not only of
automatic uh data recording but of
retrieval
and reproduction uh
we have we have we are really we really
immortalize
files i was reading yesterday uh
about the irs which in 1973
finally dismantled its intelligence
program
and i was very eager to see what they
would do about the files
and i'd say now we're going to see that
they're really going to destroy these
files
oh no they said in their memo they said
we're going to select certain files in
and we're going to select certain files
out
they couldn't even bring themselves to
say that they were going to destroy
those files because they had been
gathered in defiance of the mandate of
the irs
and totally illegally so it's very hard
for us to destroy a file it's like
destroying a child
now uh everybody's getting restless
uh and uh i just want to mention one
other thing
uh we we know this from european
intelligence systems but we never seem
to learn the lesson that every
intelligent system
ultimately becomes a mode of blackmail
fouche knew about all his all his
enemies
because his enemies mistresses were in
his pay
uh and we and hoover knew about
his critics in congress because he had
something on them
and he knew about his allies
and he had their support because he had
something on them
and he knew about the enemies of his
allies because he had something on them
and so hoover built an enormous system
of blackmail
full of personal data of all kinds it
would just it would
it would make you a flesh crawl to see
the kinds of things that are in the fbi
files about people
and some of them will start out by
saying this is not a security
investigation
so we have we have gone the whole
route we have reproduced in our time in
the past 50 years
the very same experience that we are so
quick to denounce and criticize
in the repressive autocracies of the
19th century
uh and i'm i'm afraid and almost
cynical about the possibility that
congress will do anything about it
you know intelligence agencies have what
i call a barbarossa
syndrome when things get bad they retire
to the cave
uh and wait for improvement uh and there
and all they will do when the
now in this adverse climate is again to
wait until the
climate changes when they will emerge
and be doing business as before
thank you
for more information on the central
intelligence agency
contact center for national security
studies
122 maryland avenue northwest
washington dc 2002
this program was produced at radio
station wwuh
in west hartford connecticut
you